secure-terminal(1) -- a terminal where paste is safe by construction
====================================================================

<!--
# Copyright (C) 2026 - 2026 ENCRYPTED SUPPORT LLC <adrelanos@whonix.org>
# See the file COPYING for copying conditions.
-->

## SYNOPSIS

`secure-terminal` [OPTIONS] [`--` <PROGRAM> [<ARGS>...]]

`secure-terminal` `-e` <STRING>

`secure-terminal` `ctl` [`--instance-group` <NAME>] <COMMAND> [<ARGS>...]

## DESCRIPTION

secure-terminal is a small terminal for pasting commands into, and reading text
out of, without worrying about invisible characters, bidi overrides or escape
sequences. Its default display is printable ASCII only (everything else is
neutralized) and it interprets no escape sequences from program output, so a
pasted or printed lie cannot redraw or reorder what you see. Paste is sanitized
to ASCII before it reaches the shell.

Without `--`, `-e` or a reused instance, a shell (from `$SHELL`, else
`/bin/bash`) is started. With `--` the remaining arguments are run as a real
argv, with no shell reparse.

## OPTIONS

  * `--title` <TITLE>:
    Set the initial tab title.

  * `--tui`, `--no-tui`:
    Start this tab in TUI mode (interpret escapes through a confined screen
    model) or in the safe CLI mode. Overrides the configured default for this
    tab only. TUI mode needs `python3-pyte`.

  * `--mode` `box`|`show`|`reveal`|`detail`:
    Initial unicode display mode (see DISPLAY MODES).

  * `-e`, `--command` <STRING>:
    Run <STRING>, shell-split but without a shell. Prefer `--` <PROGRAM>
    <ARGS> for a real argv.

  * `--class` <CLASS>:
    Set the window WM_CLASS / Wayland app-id, for window-manager rules.

  * `--name` <NAME>:
    Set the window WM_CLASS instance name (X11).

  * `--new-instance`:
    Force a fresh process instead of reusing a running instance.

  * `--instance-group` <NAME>:
    Which running instance to reuse (default: "default").

  * `--version`:
    Print the version and exit.

  * `-h`, `--help`:
    Print a usage summary and exit.

  * `--` <PROGRAM> [<ARGS>...]:
    Run <PROGRAM> directly as a real argv (no shell reparse). Repeat a leading
    program per tab where supported.

## DISPLAY MODES

secure-terminal has two rendering modes, chosen per tab:

  * CLI mode (default, safe):
    A strict, line-oriented display. No escape sequence from program output is
    interpreted; output is append-only, so a program can never reach back and
    rewrite a line already shown.

  * TUI mode (opt-in):
    Escapes are interpreted inside an isolated in-memory screen model that has
    no OS reach: it cannot set the window title or touch the system clipboard.
    Every on-screen character is still ASCII/unicode-filtered and colours keep a
    contrast guard. Use it to run full-screen programs (ssh, an editor, htop) and
    for the shell's completion menus and progress displays.

The unicode `--mode` controls how a non-ASCII byte in output is shown (the top-bar
label for `box` is "Box"):

  * `box`:
    Replace it with a coloured box, one per character, tinted by risk class (the
    safe default). A saved transcript maps the box back to a plain ASCII "_".

  * `show`:
    Render the glyph when printable, tinted by risk class so a look-alike stands
    out (a homoglyph confusable with ASCII wears a louder colour than honest
    foreign text). Non-printable classes (invisible, bidi, control) have no glyph,
    so they still show as the same coloured box.

  * `reveal`:
    Show a `<U+XXXX>` codepoint badge (hover for its name).

  * `detail`:
    Like reveal but with the codepoint's Unicode name inline, `<U+XXXX NAME>`.

## CONFIGURATION

Settings are `KEY=value` lines spread over `*.conf` drop-in files, read from
these directories, lowest precedence first:

    /usr/lib/secure-terminal.d/*.conf       built-in vendor defaults
    /etc/secure-terminal.d/*.conf           system administrator
    /usr/local/etc/secure-terminal.d/*.conf local administrator
    ~/.config/secure-terminal.d/*.conf      user (highest precedence)

The user's own choices are written to
`~/.config/secure-terminal.d/50_user.conf`. A privileged directory may `lock` a
key so the user cannot override it. The built-in defaults file documents every
key. See also the app's View menu and the global Settings dialog.

## REMOTE CONTROL

`secure-terminal ctl` can list tabs, rename a tab, read a tab's rendered text
(`dump-tab`) and send text into a tab (`send-text`, as if typed) over an
owner-only socket. It is an injection/read surface and is OFF by default; it can
only be enabled from a privileged configuration directory (`remote_control`).

## FILES

  * `~/.config/secure-terminal.d/*.conf`:
    User configuration (see CONFIGURATION).

  * `~/.local/state/secure-terminal/`:
    Restored session: the tab list and each tab's scrollback.

  * `/etc/apparmor.d/secure-terminal`:
    AppArmor confinement profile.

## SECURITY

secure-terminal does not sandbox the programs you run; if you choose to run
something harmful it runs, as in any terminal. What it protects is VIEWING
untrusted data: a crafted file, a program's output, a login banner or a filename
can carry escape sequences that, on a normal terminal, act rather than merely
display -- quietly changing your clipboard (so a later paste inserts text you
never copied), drawing a link whose text lies about its target, or putting text
onto your input line. secure-terminal removes those escapes so reading untrusted
output is safe, and sanitizes paste so untrusted text cannot smuggle a hidden
command into the shell.

The safe-by-construction guarantees rest on the CLI mode: no escape parser,
printable-ASCII-only display, ASCII-sanitized paste, and a memory-safe
implementation. TUI mode is a deliberate, clearly-indicated, lower-guarantee mode;
the confined screen model still filters every character, and each OSC feature
(title, clipboard, hyperlink, colours, ...) is neutralized unless you enable it
(see `View > OSC features`), at your own risk. Only run programs you trust in TUI
mode.

## WWW

https://secure-terminal.github.io

## AUTHOR

secure-terminal and this man page are AI-assisted; see
https://github.com/org-ai-assisted .
